---
title: "Re-targeting Matrix factorization with restricted monotonicity"
collection: projects
type: "Intern Project"
permalink: /projects/2016-07-22-project-2
venue: "Microsoft Research Lab"
date: 2016-07-22
location: "Bengaluru, India"
---

A classical way for matrix completion is to regress over the ratings provided by different users to different movies by learning latent user and movie features. The regression method focusses on reducing the distance between the actual and the predicted ratings. A more important criteria for recommending is to preserve the order of ratings. Therefore we come up with different matrix completion schemes that are results of optimizing the loss over a restricted space that preserve order using strictly monotonic non-parametric functions. Our methods give better validation results than the naive Matrix completion methods.

There are 3 variants that exploit such a notion :-
1. Every user has a monotonic function.
2. All the users have a universal monotonic functions.
3. Clustering users based on different monotonic functions.

The transformed ratings are used during the optimization. The optimization is done using isotonic regression that minimizes the weighted least squares objective under order preserving constraints.

The loss used for regression can be generalized to other Bregman Divergences, not just least squares and help eliminating an extra degre of freedom in the model that appears because the monotonic functions and user-movie features are jointly scale-variant.

The intern presentation slides can be found [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1u_cx56K4xzdzznv-wuj1m9O1W98XaKjB/view?usp=sharing)